SCUMMTR(1)                  General Commands Manual                 SCUMMTR(1)

NAME
     scummtr - import and export fan translations for SCUMM engine games

SYNOPSIS
     scummtr -i [-bcqvw] [-l language] -g gameid -p gamedir -f input
     scummtr -o [-bchHInqvw] [-a restypes] [-A restypes] [-l language]
             -g gameid -p gamedir -f output
     scummtr -L

DESCRIPTION
     The scummtr tool imports and exports text for SCUMM engine games.  The
     mode of operation is chosen with one of the following options:

     -i      Import text into the game data files.

     -o      Export text from the game data files.

     -L      List all supported games with their respective gameid.

     The other options are as follows:

     -a restypes
                 Protect the specified SCUMM resource types with extra
                 padding, when exporting.

                 Some game resources are created with a short name and use a
                 longer name later in the game.  In such cases, `@' padding
                 characters must be added to prevent game errors when the
                 resource is renamed (this is especially true with the
                 original interpreters).  The -a option does this action
                 automatically.

                 Valid resource types for the -a option are:

                 a       Pad actor resources.

                 o       Pad object resources.

                 v       Pad verb resources.

     -A restypes
                 Same as -a, with variable IDs taken into account.  This
                 protects even more resources, at the cost of a slight memory
                 increase which is negligible nowadays.

                 Using -A aov by default is recommended.

     -b          Translation file will be handled in binary mode, instead of
                 text.

                 Note that this makes most other options inoperative.  This
                 flag may not correctly work with all games.

     -c          Ease the use of some Western European characters, by
                 interpreting the text in the Windows-1252 encoding.  If
                 neither -c nor -r is used, non-ASCII characters will be
                 handled as escape sequences.

                 Note that you can only use the characters available in your
                 current SCUMM fonts.

     -f file     The path to the translation file (default: scummtr.txt).

     -g gameid   The ID of the game variant to be translated, as given by -L.

     -h          Include a small header at the start of each line, indicating
                 the script context of the current string.

                 The first sequence is the SCUMM room number, and the other
                 one is the SCUMM resource containing this text string.

     -H          Represent escape sequences as hexadecimal codes, instead of
                 decimal codes.

     -I          Include the current SCUMM instruction opcode, before each
                 line.

     -l language
                 V1 and V2 games only (Maniac Mansion and Zak McKracken).
                 Choose the language charset to be used by -c.

                 Possible values are:

                 de      Original German charset.

                 en      Original English charset (default).

                 fr      Original French charset.

                 it      Original Italian charset.

     -n          Never include any ";; ScummTR note:" comment.

                 These comments are added by default to help some text editors
                 infer the proper encoding of the translation files, but they
                 may interfere with some derivative tools which do not expect
                 them.  -n restores the original ScummTR 0.4.0 behavior of not
                 emitting those lines.

     -p gamedir  The path to the game (default: current directory).

     -q          Quiet mode.  Suppress informational output.

     -r          Raw text.  Preserve the original text encoding of the game.

                 This disables any text encoding conversion and escaping: the
                 text is interpreted "as-is" (except for non-printable ASCII
                 characters and some internal SCUMM sequences, which remain
                 escaped), and you must configure your text editor to
                 recognize the intended encoding (usually an older MS-DOS code
                 page).

                 This can be useful for non-Western-European languages.

     -v          Verbose mode.

     -w          Use Windows newline characters (CRLF).  This is usually
                 compatible with more text editors, and thus recommended.

EXAMPLES
     Extract the text of the original Monkey Island 2 game to a Windows-1252
     file, with added context and protected resource names:

           $ scummtr -g monkey2 -cwh -A aov -p /path/to/MI2 -of mi2_orig.txt

     Import a new French translation into the game files:

           $ scummtr -g monkey2 -cwh -A aov -p /path/to/MI2 -if mi2_fr.txt

     Extract the text of the Japanese version of Monkey Island 2 (FM-TOWNS) in
     Shift_JIS, from the current directory:

           $ scummtr -g monkey2 -rw -of mi2_towns_jpn.txt

     Export the text of a German Zak McKracken V2 game, padding resources,
     with default paths:

           $ scummtr -g zakv2 -l de -cw -A aov -o

HISTORY
     The scummtr tool was written between 2003 and 2005 by Thomas Combeleran
     for the ATP team, and was open-sourced in 2020 under the MIT license.

CAVEATS
     Your text editor must not remove trailing spaces or empty lines,
     otherwise you will have import errors.

     Since each game and each variant of each game had its own list of
     accepted characters (usually a subset of an MS-DOS code page), it is not
     possible to know if a character is available without testing it in the
     game.  See also scummfont(1) in order to visualize or modify the included
     font tables.

     Unicode files are not supported, and non-Latin-script alphabets need
     extra work for convenient use.

     On case-sensitive file systems, game data files must currently follow the
     DOS convention of being all-uppercase to be properly detected.

ScummTR                        December 27, 2020                       ScummTR
